#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass memoir
\begin_preamble
\input{../general-preamble}
\input{../master-preamble}
\graphicspath{{../images/}{../graphs}} % Override the one in the general preamble.
% Bibliography stuff
\addbibresource{landrent.bib}
\end_preamble
\options oneside, article, extrafontsizes, 10pt, latin9, utf8,main=american
\use_default_options true
\master ../0-Rethinking Land Rent-Master.lyx
\begin_modules
biblatex
changebars
enumitem
fixme
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
tabs-within-sections
todonotes
knitr
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding default
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 1
\bibtex_command biber
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_title "Land Rent in the Circuit of Capital: Time, Space, and Macroeconomic Geography"
\pdf_author "Marshall M.A. Feldman"
\pdf_subject "Macroeconomic Geography"
\pdf_keywords "Geographical Political Economy, Circuit of Capital, Land Rent"
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\branch Local References
\selected 1
\filename_suffix 1
\color #faf0e6
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1in
\topmargin 1in
\rightmargin 1in
\bottommargin 1in
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
With myMemoir, don't put title, etc.
 in LyX.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
\begin_inset CommandInset label
LatexCommand label
name "sec:Introduction"

\end_inset

Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In a recent review of the history of land-rent theory, 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand citet
after "1"
key "ward2016theshitty"

\end_inset

 characterize the subject as loaded with 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

confusion and conflict
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 throughout its history.
 In particular, they single out contemporary heterodox land-rent theory
 as having 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fallen into a state of dilapidation
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand nocite
key "ward2016theshitty"

\end_inset

(p.
 21) and in need of renovation.
 Based on their analysis of the reasons for this decline, they briefly offer
 a blueprint for reviving land-rent theory and encourage debate around this
 project.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this they are not alone.
 Several other scholars also have recently called attention to land-rent
 theory's decrepit condition and offered prescriptions for its renewal.
 But although they share a general consensus regarding land-rent theory's
 poor condition and the desirability of reviving it, they vary both in their
 diagnoses of what is wrong with the theory and in their proposals for reviving
 it.
 In some instances, such differences may be reconcilable, or even minor,
 with complementary-but-different positions on the subject readily capable
 of being combined: it is a matter of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

both/and.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 In other cases, possibilities for reconciliation are not obvious and different
 positions seem to be starkly opposed: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

either/or
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 appears to be the only possibility.
 In such instances, engagement and debate might resolve conflict between
 positions, or at least bring to light why such resolution is impossible.
 Perhaps such debate would result in dropping one approach in favor of another.
 At the very least it could highlight strengths and weaknesses in different
 positions.
 Yet among the various proposals currently on the table, I know of no such
 debates.
 Instead, a more 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tribal
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 pattern of disengagement and isolation seems likely, with different approaches
 going their own ways and ignoring the others.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
This conclusion follows from a particular reading of the history of land-rent
 theory in the larger context of economic geography.
 See Section 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "sec:History"

\end_inset

.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
To some extent the present essay hopes to forestall this by insisting on
 
\emph on
theoretical coherence
\emph default
: not only in land-rent theory itself but in conjunction with the larger
 body of heterodox political economy, including both geographical political
 economy and heterodox economics.
 In other words, the essay rethinks land-rent theory in several ways, all
 of which potentially link land-rent theory to broader currents of contemporary
 heterodox political-economy.
 This is not to say that this is the only legitimate way to theorize land-rent:
 other ways are certainly possible and may yield important insights.
 But a trans-disciplinary political-economic approach can be an extraordinarily
 powerful tool, and the challenge for advocates of alternative approaches
 is to demonstrate that any alternative is at least equally powerful.
 It may be that a specific theory of land-rent is better able to explain
 an isolated case, particularly if the theory employs 
\emph on
ad hoc
\emph default
 concepts tailored to the case.
 But the requirement of broader theoretical coherence implies that any specific
 land-rent theory must be consistent with and part of a larger theoretical
 corpus and that the evaluation of competing theories of land rent must
 involve the larger corpus as a whole.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
This is not to say that two or more competing theories of land rent cannot
 
\emph on
both
\emph default
 be consistent with a 
\emph on
single
\emph default
, broader theoretical framework.
 Such possibilities are always open.
 But in such cases, adjudication between the competitors cannot be confined
 solely to land rent itself and must instead evaluate the competitors 
\emph on
as part of
\emph default
 the larger framework.
 Similarly, a single element in land-rent theory may be compatible within
 two or more broader frameworks.
 In such cases, rather than just letting the land-rent component stand by
 itself or arbitrarily choosing one of the larger frameworks, evaluation
 of alternatives also requires evaluating the single land-rent theory in
 the context of the competing, larger frameworks.
 
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
Motivating Concerns
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Several concerns motivate this approach.
 Most fundamental is the fragmentation of economic geography since the early
 1990s: growing fragmentation over the past two-and-a-half decades contributed
 to land-rent theory's decline three ways.
 First, to the extent to which different scholarly tendencies within land-rent
 theory were also present in the larger body of economic geography, fragmentatio
n in the latter tended to 
\emph on
pulverize
\emph default
 land-rent theory, pulling different tendencies apart from one another and
 thereby shattering whatever wholeness and cohesiveness land-rent theory
 might have had.
 As different schools of economic geography separated from one another,
 so too did each school's presence within land-rent theory tend to hive
 off from the rest of land-rent theory, so that land-rent theory reflected
 the fragmentation in the larger body of economic geography.
 Second, pulverization of land-rent theory allowed different approaches
 to become isolated from one another, and this in turn allowed them to 
\emph on
immunize
\emph default
 themselves from external criticism: a given approach could become self-referent
ial and give itself license to ignore alternative approaches that might
 be potential competitors or critics.
 Third, and perhaps most important, it isolated different approaches in
 economic geography from important strands of heterodox scholarship in other
 social science disciplines.
 Land-rent theory was no exception: it too was cut off from heterodox social
 science outside economic geography.
 While land rent has not exactly been a hot topic in heterodox social science,
 it does have some presence, but this scholarship almost never makes its
 way into contemporary work on land-rent in economic geography.
 Furthermore, other developments in heterodox social science, without explicit
 connections to land rent, might nonetheless be productively combined with
 land-rent theory in economic geography were it not for the fact that economic
 geography seems completely detached these other developments.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Section 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "sec:History"

\end_inset

 below, discusses the history of economic geography and land-rent theory
 and explains how economic geography's fragmentation eroded land-rent theory's
 cohesiveness.
 As for isolation, it had two closely related, detrimental effects.
 
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Maybe cite Aalbers & Christophers on housing.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On one hand, fragmentation-
\emph on
cum
\emph default
-isolation allows self-referential, safe-spaces for scholarship that may
 seem valid within a self-selected intellectual cocoon, but that is obviously
 invalid, at least without major revision, when considered in a larger intellect
ual context.
 This is not mainly a matter of different paradigms: although debates between
 paradigms can be fruitful and therefore desirable, they are extremely complex
 and difficult because paradigmatic differences are so very basic.
 Instead, within 
\emph on
a common 
\emph default
paradigm, such intellectual siloing can prevent incompatible theoretical
 interpretations from having to confront each other, and thereby prevent
 each from being supplanted by the other, combined in a new synthesis, or
 exposed as requiring reconsideration and modification in order to be consistent
 with other, related bodies of scholarship.
\begin_inset Foot
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Interestingly, the 
\size normal
\emph on
Journal of Economic Geography
\emph default
 was established in 2001 with the express goal of encouraging interchange
 between economists and economic geographers.
 But economists contributing to the journal have overwhelmingly been mainstream
 economists, while economic geographers mostly have heterodox leanings 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "sheppard2011geographical"

\end_inset

.
 It is therefore unsurprising that in the pages of the journal one can see
 sharp divisions between the two disciplines and seemingly insurmountable
 obstacles in a cross-paradigmatic 
\emph on
\lang ngerman
methodenstreit
\emph default
\lang english
 
\begin_inset CommandInset citation
LatexCommand cite
key "garretsen2011thejournal"

\end_inset

.
 With some irony, heterodox economists – who are far more likely to have
 productive interaction with today's economic geographers – have largely
 been absent from the journal.
 Given how little explicit geography one finds in contemporary heterodox
 economics, this is unsurprising, but it also may reflect the predispositions
 of the journal's economist reviewers to act as gatekeepers, confining participa
tion by the economics profession to the mainstream.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On the other hand, even when a particular theoretical intervention is valid
 on its own terms, siloing cuts it off from other, complementary threads
 within the same theoretical framework.
 This impoverishes the larger framework and all its components.
 Breaking down such walls between 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tribes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in today's economic geography and between geographical political economy
 itself and related heterodox scholarship in other social science disciplines
 has great potential to enrich all of contemporary heterodox political economy.
 Section 
\begin_inset CommandInset ref
LatexCommand ref
reference "sec:Examples"

\end_inset

has several examples of how land-rent theory might fruitfully combine with
 heterodox scholarship focused on other topics.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Continue here.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Another concern stems from the Crisis of the Early Twenty-First Century,
 or what for the sake of brevity I shall refer to here as 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Crisis-21.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Use the footnote from earlier drafts.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
A third concern is closely related to the crisis and the inadequacy of most
 analyses of it with regard to the role of land-rent: land-rent theory's
 preoccupation with micro- and meso-level mechanisms of rent extraction
 and distribution and its almost complete neglect of land rent as a macroeconomi
c and macro-geographical process.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "/Users/marsh/OneDrive/Documents/Research-King Mac/Political Economy/Land Rent in the Circuit of Capital/references"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Branch Local References
status open

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
printbibliography[title={References}]
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
