#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass memoir
\begin_preamble
\input{../general-preamble}
\input{../master-preamble}
\graphicspath{{../images/}{../graphs}} % Override the one in the general preamble.
% Bibliography stuff
\addbibresource{landrent.bib}
\end_preamble
\options oneside, article, extrafontsizes, 10pt, latin9, utf8,main=american
\use_default_options true
\master ../Land Rent in the Circuit of Capital-5 Master.lyx
\begin_modules
biblatex
changebars
enumitem
fixme
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
tabs-within-sections
todonotes
knitr
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding default
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 1
\bibtex_command biber
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_title "Land Rent in the Circuit of Capital: Time, Space, and Macroeconomic Geography"
\pdf_author "Marshall M.A. Feldman"
\pdf_subject "Macroeconomic Geography"
\pdf_keywords "Geographical Political Economy, Circuit of Capital, Land Rent"
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\branch Local References
\selected 1
\filename_suffix 1
\color #faf0e6
\end_branch
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1in
\topmargin 1in
\rightmargin 1in
\bottommargin 1in
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
With myMemoir, don't put title, etc.
 in LyX.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
On September 24, 2008 U.S.
 President George W.
 Bush addressed the nation on national TV to announce that the country,
 indeed the entire global capitalist economy, was 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

in the midst of a financial crisis.
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 Exactly 
\emph on
when
\emph default
 the crisis began varies with different observers.
 Some might designate Bush's speech as the formal start because it marks
 the beginning of formal government recognition and admission of the existence
 of a crisis.
 Others might mark the beginning at the failure of Lehman Brothers, a mega
 investment bank, in 2007 ?? The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
 dates the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Great Recession
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as lasting from ?? 2007 to ?? 2009.
 Others point to the sudden increase in defaults and foreclosures starting
 in 2006.
 An even longer perspective sees it as a crisis of neoliberalism, with the
 previous recession in 2001 and in the wake of the bursting 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

dot-com bubble
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as a harbinger of the subsequent bursting of the housing bubble in 2007
 and symptomatic of deep problems and contradictions in the neoliberal regime
 (Duminel & Levy??).
 Still others identify even longer-term trends, starting in the mid-1960's
 when profit rates began to fall in the what was then the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

core
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 of the global capitalist economy, a downward trend from which capitalism
 still has not recovered (?? Brenner, others).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Similarly, the crisis evolved and changed form, so designating its 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

end
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 is equally imprecise.
 For the NBER it was at the designated end of the Great Recession in 2009.
 But although the U.S.
 economy no longer fit NBER's criteria for designating a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

recession,
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 no serious analyst denies that Europe's debt crisis is directly tied to
 the collapse of the U.S.
 housing bubble.
 More recently, the rise of right-wing populism and economic nationalism
 associated with names like Trump, May, and LaPen seems to be another obvious
 progeny of the crisis.
 So in many senses the crisis is continuing to evolve but is far from over
 as of this writing (summer 2017).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
These observations underscore the point that rigorously making sense of
 the crisis is impossible without a theory.
 Although mainstream economics famously claimed the crisis was unforeseeable
 (??Nobody saw it coming)
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

, this is largely an artifact of the mainstream paradigm, with its use of
 equilibrium, comparative statics, and fundamental change resulting from
 exogenous 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

shocks
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as fundamental organizing concepts.
 Nonetheless, a rather small group of mainstream economists have studied
 real estate cycles, perhaps more than scholars from any other academic
 community, and they may have something to offer our understanding of the
 housing bubble and its subsequent collapse.
 Heterodox economists on the other hand go far beyond their mainstream colleague
s and offer profoundly penetrating theories of economic crises, but their
 work has thus far largely abstracted from housing (and land) as special
 elements in crisis formation and, in particular, the ongoing crisis of
 the early twenty-first century.
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Cite Dumenil & Levy
\end_layout

\end_inset

 The main exception is the small group of heterodox economists whose work
 is based on that of Henry George.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Nonetheless, some heterodox economists have been almost prescient in their
 understanding of such things.
 In the 1960's, Marxist economists Paul Baran and Paul Sweezy ??(1965) authored
 a very influential analysis of U.S.
 capitalism, arguing the increasing domination of the economy by a small
 number of oligopolistic firms made the natural tendency of such 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

monopoly capitalism
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to be one of economic stagnation, which historically had been counteracted
 only by 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

wars and their aftermaths
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and epochal innovations.
 Historically, the latter had generally be centered around means of communicatio
ns, such as canals, steamboats, railroads, streetcar lines, and the automobile.
 Seeking a common thread in in such innovations, Baran and Sweezy write:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "/Users/marsh/OneDrive/Documents/Research-King Mac/Political Economy/Land Rent in the Circuit of Capital/references"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Branch Local References
status open

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
printbibliography[title={References}]
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
