#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass memoir
\begin_preamble
\include{preamble}
\end_preamble
\options oneside,article, extrafontsizes, 10pt,latin9,utf8
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
biblatex
enumitem
sweave
changebars
fixme
eqs-within-sections
figs-within-sections
tabs-within-sections
todonotes
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\begin_local_layout
Format 60
Provides natbib 1
\end_local_layout
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding default
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing onehalf
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_title "Land Rent in the Circuit of Capital: Time, Space, and Macroeconomic Geography"
\pdf_author "Marshall M.A. Feldman"
\pdf_subject "Macroeconomic Geography"
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\leftmargin 1.5in
\topmargin 1in
\rightmargin 1in
\bottommargin 1in
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status collapsed

\begin_layout Plain Layout
With myMemoir, don't put title, etc.
 in LyX.
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
A growing consensus claims land-rent theory in economic geography is in
 deteriorated condition and needs restoration, but there is no consensus
 on how to proceed or what a restoration should entail.
 The purpose of this paper is to addresses this issue through a fundamental
 rethinking of land rent, one that is 
\emph on
pluralist
\emph default
 in that it incorporates Marxian, Austro-Georgist, and post-Keynesian/Minskyan
 elements but emphasizes 
\emph on
coherence
\emph default
 .
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The paper has three parts.
 Part 1 begins with an empirical analysis of aggregate land value in the
 United States from the 1970s to the present and, based on this analysis,
 argues that land rent was the substance of the real estate bubble leading
 up to the 2007 financial crash and subsequent crisis of the early 21st
 century.
 I then observe that, with a few notable exceptions, economic geographers
 completely failed to predict the crisis and, after the crash, were largely
 absent from public discussions of the crisis and its causes.
 Moreover, land rent has been largely absent from the heterodox literature
 about the crisis, including almost all of this literature by economic geographe
rs.
 From this I conclude that crises and macroeconomic geographical political
 economy have been missing from the literature on land rent, and any restoration
 of land rent in economic geography must emphasize land rent as a macroeconomic
 phenomenon and land rent's role in capitalist crises.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Next, in Part 2, I trace the history of land-rent theory within economic
 geography and make two arguments.
 First, in the 1970s economic geography rejected 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

spatial science
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and transitioned to geographical political economy, with a strong basis
 in Marxism.
 As part of this transition, economic geographers jettisoned the neoclassical
 theory of urban land rent and sought Marxian substitutes to explain urban
 form.
 This led economic geographers to Marx's writing on land rent published
 in Volume 3 of 
\emph on
Capital
\emph default
.
 But Marx intended to devote an entire volume of 
\emph on
Capital
\emph default
 to land rent but died before doing so.
 I argue that such a volume would have more closely resembled Quesnay's
 
\emph on
Tableau économique
\emph default
 than Alonso's bid rent curves.
 In other words, in their desire to oppose the erstwhile dominant neoclassical
 theory of urban form with something Marxian, economic geographers were
 distracted away from a concern with land rent in the overall circulation
 of capital and capitalism's dynamics and became preoccupied with microeconomic
 mechanisms for rent extraction in urban contexts.
 Second, in the 1990s land-rent theory's deterioration coincided with growing
 fragmentation throughout economic geography itself.
 This was not accidental: interest in land rent among economic geographers
 dissolved as they broke up into isolated 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tribes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 defined by other concerns.
 This pulverized land-rent theory, immunized individual work on land rent
 from outside criticism and/or augmentation, and thereby impoverished land-rent
 theory.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
In Part 3, the remainder of the paper suggests a way forward by sketching
 various loosely related topics.
 This part begins with a realist examination of the ontological nature of
 land rent, concluding that land rent exists at both microeconomic and macroecon
omic – individual and societal – levels, but while its existence at these
 levels is related, they are not the same.
 Next, I debunk the widely held belief that land rent arises because the
 supply of land is fixed.
 I show that several mechanisms allow the supply of land to vary, and the
 supply itself is intimately related to use value.
 Thus, instead of rent arising from the supply of land being fixed in space,
 it arises from supply being temporarily fixed in space-time and by use.
 This then becomes the basis for reconsidering the macroeconomics of the
 Marxian theory of land rent, with land having the potential to be produced
 as a commodity and entering into the production of all other commodities
 and into the consumption of all social classes.
 The fact that as a use-value land can be produced only over long periods
 of time creates possibilities for capturing land rents and underpins the
 Austro-Georgist theory of crises driven by real estate cycles.
 It also opens the possibility of Minskyan asset-price speculation, inflated
 land-value bubbles, and consequent financial instability.
 Widespread working-class home ownership adds impetus and severity, as individua
l households find themselves needing to pay inflated prices for shelter
 in speculative markets but also having the potential for windfall gains
 through (government subsidized) home ownership.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
The paper concludes with a discussion of geography and the various ways
 such macroeconomic dynamics touch the ground, are affected by it, and their
 contradictions.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset Note Comment
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
\begin_inset CommandInset bibtex
LatexCommand bibtex
bibfiles "../References"
options "plain"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset ERT
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout


\backslash
printbibliography[title={References}]
\end_layout

\end_inset


\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
